README.md, before:

# Newsletter / Lá thư Làng Mai

Single source publishing project using [Eleventy](https://www.11ty.dev) and [PagedJS](https://www.pagedjs.org/).

## Setup for local development
Run `./bin/setup.sh`

## Running locally
Run `npm start` and browse to [http://localhost:8080/](http://localhost:8080/).

## Generating PDF files
Run `npm run build`

## Deployment
Because of the bug that currently sometimes renders 4 columns on first run, its best to have
Eleventy running so you can check if the layout your deploying is correct.

1. In [.eleventy](.eleventy) set `processImages` to `true`.
2. Run `npm start`, check if the layout is ok. Trigger a re-render if needed.
3. Run `npm run deploy`

## Code style
- Use hyphenated class names in CSS.

## Useful resources
- PagedJS [documentation](https://www.pagedjs.org/documentation/)
& [quick solution & fix to layout problems](https://gitlab.pagedmedia.org/tools/pagedjs/-/wikis/Quick-solution-&-fix-to-layout-problems)

- [Designing For Print With CSS - Rachel Andrew in Smashing Magazine](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2015/01/designing-for-print-with-css/)
- [print-css.rocks](https://www.print-css.rocks/)
- [PrintCSS](https://printcss.net/articles)
- [Book toolkit](http://booktoolkit.com/resources)
- [Une chaîne de publication collaborative et multisupport pour le musée Saint-Raymond](https://julie-blanc.fr/blog/2020-11-05_chiragan/) (French article that describes a similar workflow. Very readable with Google translate. [Source code available](https://gitlab.com/musee-saint-raymond/villa-chiragan/).)
- [Multilingual sites with Eleventy](https://www.webstoemp.com/blog/multilingual-sites-eleventy/)
- [Conversion to Markdown with GroupDocs](https://products.groupdocs.app/conversion/odt-to-md)

## Other tools considered
- [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/)
- [Prince](https://princexml.com/)
- [Vivliostyle](https://vivliostyle.org/)
- [Quire](https://quire.getty.edu/)
- [html2print](http://osp.kitchen/tools/html2print/)
- [A comparison of different html2pdf tools](https://azettl.github.io/html2pdf/)

## Bugs & ToDos
 - Images that are rotated with EXIF are not processed correctly, see https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48716266/sharp-image-library-rotates-image-when-resizing
 - � in render output, seems randomly appearing
 bởi -> b���i
 giờ đây đã -> giờ ��ây đã
 vấn tại -> vấn t���i
 mảnh đất nhỏ -> mảnh đ���t nhỏ

Commit message:

bughunt for unicode replacement char � -> seems to appear after bottom placed images

README.md, after:

# Newsletter / Lá thư Làng Mai

Single source publishing project using [Eleventy](https://www.11ty.dev) and [PagedJS](https://www.pagedjs.org/).

## Setup for local development
Run `./bin/setup.sh`

## Running locally
Run `npm start` and browse to [http://localhost:8080/](http://localhost:8080/).

## Generating PDF files
Run `npm run build`

## Deployment
Because of the bug that currently sometimes renders 4 columns on first run, its best to have
Eleventy running so you can check if the layout your deploying is correct.

1. In [.eleventy](.eleventy) set `processImages` to `true`.
2. Run `npm start`, check if the layout is ok. Trigger a re-render if needed.
3. Run `npm run deploy`

## Code style
- Use hyphenated class names in CSS.

## Useful resources
- PagedJS [documentation](https://www.pagedjs.org/documentation/)
& [quick solution & fix to layout problems](https://gitlab.pagedmedia.org/tools/pagedjs/-/wikis/Quick-solution-&-fix-to-layout-problems)

- [Designing For Print With CSS - Rachel Andrew in Smashing Magazine](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2015/01/designing-for-print-with-css/)
- [print-css.rocks](https://www.print-css.rocks/)
- [PrintCSS](https://printcss.net/articles)
- [Book toolkit](http://booktoolkit.com/resources)
- [Une chaîne de publication collaborative et multisupport pour le musée Saint-Raymond](https://julie-blanc.fr/blog/2020-11-05_chiragan/) (French article that describes a similar workflow. Very readable with Google translate. [Source code available](https://gitlab.com/musee-saint-raymond/villa-chiragan/).)
- [Multilingual sites with Eleventy](https://www.webstoemp.com/blog/multilingual-sites-eleventy/)
- [Conversion to Markdown with GroupDocs](https://products.groupdocs.app/conversion/odt-to-md)

## Other tools considered
- [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/)
- [Prince](https://princexml.com/)
- [Vivliostyle](https://vivliostyle.org/)
- [Quire](https://quire.getty.edu/)
- [html2print](http://osp.kitchen/tools/html2print/)
- [A comparison of different html2pdf tools](https://azettl.github.io/html2pdf/)

## Bugs & ToDos
 - Images that are rotated with EXIF are not processed correctly, see https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48716266/sharp-image-library-rotates-image-when-resizing
 - � in render output, seems randomly appearing
        bởi -> b���i
        giờ đây đã -> giờ ��ây đã
        vấn tại -> vấn t���i
        mảnh đất nhỏ -> mảnh đ���t nhỏ
        ăn mừng là -> ăn m��g là
    keeps being in the same position until eleventy is restarted
    appears in paragraphs after an image (e.g. first bottom placed image)
